content/posts/home & garden/getting-started-fermenting-at-home.adoc, before:

= Getting Started Fermenting at Home

:slug: getting-started-fermenting-at-home
:date: 2021-06-16 23:17:32T-07:00
:tags: fermentation,food
:status: draft
:meta_description: If you want to get started lacto-fermenting vegetables at home, this is how I recommend you do it.

.Three mason jars, full of fermenting vegetables. Two Bánh Mì(ish) and one eggs.
image::{static}/images/posts/lessons-from-two-years-of-fermenting/IMG_20190330_104815-smaller.webp["Three mason jars, full of fermenting things. Two Bánh Mì(ish) and one eggs.", 400]

I've been fermenting vegetables of various kinds (and occasionally other things) at home for a little over two years. It's a fun, interesting & nutritious hobby. On the whole it's pretty easy and low stakes -- the worst thing that happens is a few cucumbers go mouldy.

If you want to try, here's how I'd recommend that you get started.


== Books for Getting Started

I've read these books and would recommend them. To get started, I got the first one, Wild Fermentation, and went from there:

* https://amzn.to/3vsrC3H[Wild Fermentation: The Flavor, Nutrition, and Craft of Live-Culture Foods, 2nd Edition]
* https://amzn.to/3xtPMfy[The Noma Guide to Fermentation]
* https://amzn.to/3gvjhb2[Fiery Ferments: 70 Stimulating Recipes for Hot Sauces, Spicy Chutneys, Kimchis with Kick, and Other Blazing Fermented Condiments]

Commit message:

Misc Copy editing
- Lots of copy edits
- Removed all usages of the rwd tag
- better tagging for recipe,fodmaps.scd

content/posts/home & garden/getting-started-fermenting-at-home.adoc, after:

:title: Getting Started Fermenting at Home
:slug: getting-started-fermenting-at-home
:date: 2021-06-16 23:17:32T-07:00
:tags: fermentation,food
:status: draft
:meta_description: If you want to get started lacto-fermenting vegetables at home, this is how I recommend you do it.

.Three mason jars, full of fermenting vegetables. Two Bánh Mì(ish) and one eggs.
image::{static}/images/posts/lessons-from-two-years-of-fermenting/IMG_20190330_104815-smaller.webp["Three mason jars, full of fermenting things. Two Bánh Mì(ish) and one eggs.", 400]

I've been fermenting vegetables of various kinds (and occasionally other things) at home for a little over two years. It's a fun, interesting & nutritious hobby. On the whole it's pretty easy and low stakes -- the worst thing that happens is a few cucumbers go mouldy.

If you want to try, here's how I'd recommend that you get started:

* Read https://amzn.to/3vsrC3H[Wild Fermentation: The Flavor, Nutrition, and Craft of Live-Culture Foods, 2nd Edition]
* Make a batch of link:++{filename}basic-pickles-or-fermented-cucumbers-recipe.adoc++[Basic Pickles] to get started.

== Things you need for your first ferment

This is very the minimum equipment that you'll need to get started.

== Books for Getting Started

I've read these books and would recommend them. To get started, I got the first one, Wild Fermentation, and went from there:

* https://amzn.to/3vsrC3H[Wild Fermentation: The Flavor, Nutrition, and Craft of Live-Culture Foods, 2nd Edition]
* https://amzn.to/3xtPMfy[The Noma Guide to Fermentation]
* https://amzn.to/3gvjhb2[Fiery Ferments: 70 Stimulating Recipes for Hot Sauces, Spicy Chutneys, Kimchis with Kick, and Other Blazing Fermented Condiments]
