content/posts/tech/better-figures-and-images-plugin-for-pelican.rst, before:

:title: Better Figures & Images Plugin for Pelican
:slug: better-figures-images-plugin-for-pelican
:date: 2013-05-29 15:49:49
:tags: pelican, python, plugin, rwd
:category: tech
:meta_description: How to get perfect and responsive images and figures with Pelican - using the Better Images & Figures Plugin.

How Figures & Images work in Pelican, by default
================================================

By default Pelican does a great job with figures and images, thanks to built-in support in ReStructuredText [#rst_img]_. Pelican will turn this rst input:

.. code-block:: rst

    .. figure:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png
        :align: right

        This is the caption of the figure.

        The legend consists of all elements after the caption. In this case, the legend consists of this paragraph.

into this HTML output:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure align-right">
        <img alt="/static/images/dummy-200x200.png" src="/static/images/dummy-200x200.png" />
        <p class="caption">This is the caption of the figure.</p>
        <div class="legend">The legend consists of all elements after the caption. In this case, the legend consists of this paragraph</div>
    </div>

Which, given this CSS:

.. code-block:: css

    /* Styles for Figures & Images */

    img {
        border: 1px solid #bbb;
        border-radius: 3px;
        padding: 4px;
        float: left;
        margin: 1em 1em 1em 0;
        box-shadow: 4px 4px 4px 0px rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.5);
    }
    img.align-right {
        float: right;
        margin: 1em 0 1em 1em;
    }

    .figure {
        border: 1px solid #bbb;
        border-radius: 3px;
        padding: 4px;
        float: left;
        margin: 0 1em 1em 0;
        box-shadow: 4px 4px 4px 0px rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.5);
    }
    .figure.align-right {
        float: right;
        margin: 0 0 1em 1em;
    }
    .figure.align-left {
        float: left;
    }
    .figure img {
        border: none;
        border-radius: 0;
        padding: 0;
        margin: 0;
        box-shadow: none;

        float: left;
    }
    .figure p.caption {
        margin: 0;
        font-size: 80%;
        padding: 4px;
        float: left;
        text-align: left;
    }
    .figure div.legend {
        padding: 4px;
        font-size: 80%;
        color: #aaa;
        font-style: italic;

        float: left;
    }

...will look something like this:

.. image:: /static/images/screenshot-13-04-29_16-42-00-pm.png
    :class: bare

This is great, but it's not *quite* what I wanted. I wanted the caption under the image and then the figure to shrink to fit the size of the image it contains. It turns out that this is impossible in HTML & CSS unless you give the browser an explicit ``width`` attribute for the ``img`` and the containing ``div``.

If you actually do that, and add a ``style="width: 200px; height: auto;"`` attribute to both the ``div`` and the ``img``, you get this - which *is* what I wanted:

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png
    :align: right

    This is the caption of the figure.

    The legend consists of all elements after the caption. In this
    case, the legend consists of this paragraph.

The problem with this, is that it means that you need to supply a width attribute containing the actual pixel width of the image, for each and every image you use. This would be *very* tedious to do by hand, so I wrote a Pelican plugin to do this, plus a couple of other related things, for me.


What the Better Figures & Images plugin does
==============================================


- Adds a ``style="width: ???px; height: auto;"`` attribute to any ``<img>`` tags in the content, by automatically checking the dimensions of the actual image file on disk and adding the appropriate attribute to the ``<img>`` tag.
- Also finds any ``<div class="figures">`` tags in the content which contain images - and adds the same style attribute to them.
- If the ``RESPONSIVE_IMAGES`` setting is true, it adds ``style="width: ???px; max-width: 100%; height: auto;"`` instead.
- Corrects Alt text: If an img alt attribute = the image filename, it sets it to ""


Assuming that the image is 250px wide, it turns output like this:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure">
        <img alt="/static/images/image.jpg" src="/static/images/image.jpg" />
        <p class="caption">
            This is the caption of the figure.
        </p>
        <div class="legend">
            Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
        </div>
    </div>

into output like this:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure" style="width: 250px; height: auto;">
        <img style="width: 250px; height: auto;" alt="" src="/static/images/image.jpg" />
        <p class="caption">
            This is the caption of the figure.
        </p>
        <div class="legend">
            Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
        </div>
    </div>

or this, if ``RESPONSIVE_IMAGES = True``:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure" style="width: 250px; max-width: 100%; height: auto;">
        <img style="width: 250px; max-width: 100%; height: auto;" alt="" src="/static/images/image.jpg" />
        <p class="caption">
            This is the caption of the figure.
        </p>
        <div class="legend">
            Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
        </div>
    </div>

How to use the Plugin
========================

I will endeavour to get this plugin upstream into the main pelican-plugins repository, but for now either checkout my fork of the pelican-plugins repository from GitHub and switch to the correct branch:

.. code-block:: console

    $ git clone git@github.com:dflock/pelican-plugins.git
    $ git checkout better_figures_and_images

or just `download that branch <https://github.com/dflock/pelican-plugins/archive/better_figures_and_images.zip>`_, save it somewhere and extract the contents.

Then add something like this to your pelican config:

.. code-block:: python

    # Where to look for plugins
    PLUGIN_PATH = '../pelican-plugins'
    # Which plugins to enable
    PLUGINS = ['better_figures_and_images']

Optionally, enable the responsive stuff via the plugin, by adding this to your config:

.. code-block:: python

    # Setting for the better_figures_and_images plugin
    RESPONSIVE_IMAGES = True

Or add something like this to your theme's CSS:

.. code-block:: css

    img, div.figure { max-width: 100%; height: auto; }

And that's it - you should now have Better Figures & Images.

(Not Very) Frequently Asked Questions
=======================================

What is the RESPONSIVE_IMAGES setting for?
---------------------------------------------

This site uses a responsive layout - it changes its layout and column widths based on the size of the screen or window you use to view it. This means, ideally, that any images contained inside those columns would also shrink or expand to fit, when the column they're in changes. If they don't, the images will break out of the columns if the column becomes too narrow.

The simplest way to do this, would be to add something like this to your CSS:

.. code-block:: css

    img, div.figure { max-width: 100%; height: auto; }

This tells the browser that images can only ever be as wide as their container - i.e. 100% of the width of their parent element. This means that when the column that the image is in shrinks - and becomes smaller than the images native width - the image will be shrunk to fit inside.

Note that this isn't the perfect solution and isn't fully responsive - because there `isn't a perfect solution at the moment <http://css-tricks.com/which-responsive-images-solution-should-you-use/>`_ - this provides a simple solution that gets me 80% of what I wanted: shrink to fit images that expand up to their full width (but no further) and stay inside their containers.

Couldn't you just...
------------------------

Yes, you could just add that to your CSS and only have the plugin add the ``width: ???px`` part - this would work fine. If you want to do that, either don't set ``RESPONSIVE_IMAGES`` in your pelican config, or set it to ``False``.

So why is there a RESPONSIVE_IMAGES setting at all?
-----------------------------------------------------

Um... It's partially just there because this is the way I wrote the plugin initially, before I thought it through properly.

The reason I *left it in*, is twofold:

#. It means that you can get responsive images and figures just by using this plugin - no need to mess with your theme's CSS if you don't want to.
#. Because there are lots of `other ways <http://css-tricks.com/which-responsive-images-solution-should-you-use/>`_ to fudge responsive images and I may decide to use one of the alternatives - and at some point, presumably an official standard way to do it will arrive. So I may want to do extra processing, add extra markup, or do other things to support future responsive image techniques here, so I left that hook in so that I could easily add it.

Why are you messing with the ALT text?
----------------------------------------

By default Pelican adds a default ``alt`` attribute to images that don't have them - and sets it to the image's filename.

This is well meaning, but wrong.

The ``alt`` attribute is meant to provide a textual alternative to the image, for people who can't see the image, for some reason - they might be blind, using a screen reader, they might be using a text-only browser, they might be a search engine, the image might not have loaded for some reason, etc...

Imagine that you are reading your page to someone over a phone. What would be the appropriate thing to do when you reach the image? [#alt_jkorplea]_ What would you say about that image if you were describing the page over the phone to someone?

If you wouldn't mention the image at all, then explicitly set the ``alt`` attribute to an empty string:

.. code-block:: html

    <img alt="" src="" ... />

Otherwise, set it to whatever you would have said over the phone.

Why not just leave it out? Because screen readers tend to read the filename for images that don't have an ``alt`` attribute. This also means that you never need to set the ``alt`` attribute to the image filename - that's already there in the ``src`` attribute, if needed.

Examples
====================

Here are a few working examples, showing the results of using the plugin. The original rst source for these are available in the plugins ``/test`` folder:

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-800x300.png

    This image is wider than the column it's in - try resizing the browser window.

    Because of the max-width: 100%, the image is resized to fit the column.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png
    :alt: A dummy placeholder image, 200x200 pixels square.

    This image is only 200px wide - smaller that the column it's in.

    The max-width: 100% doesn't stretch the image, because it's also got a width: 200px - making it shrink to fit.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-250x300.png
    :alt: map to buried treasure 2
    :align: right

    This is the third image caption.

    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
    tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non
proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.

.. image:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non
proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.


------------

Footnotes & References:
--------------------------

.. [#rst_img] The two image directives: "image" and "figure" in reStructuredText: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#images
.. [#alt_jkorplea] Guidelines on ALT texts in IMG elements: http://www.cs.tut.fi/~jkorpela/html/alt.html http://www.456bereastreet.com/archive/200412/the_alt_and_title_attributes/ http://diveintoaccessibility.info/day_21_ignoring_spacer_images.html

Commit message:

Updated the Better Figures and Images article after the plugin got upstreamed

content/posts/tech/better-figures-and-images-plugin-for-pelican.rst, after:

:title: Better Figures & Images Plugin for Pelican
:slug: better-figures-images-plugin-for-pelican
:date: 2013-05-29 15:49:49
:tags: pelican, python, plugin, rwd
:category: tech
:meta_description: How to get perfect and responsive images and figures with Pelican - using the Better Images & Figures Plugin.

How Figures & Images work in Pelican, by default
================================================

By default Pelican does a great job with figures and images, thanks to built-in support in ReStructuredText [#rst_img]_. Pelican will turn this rst input:

.. code-block:: rst

    .. figure:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png
        :align: right

        This is the caption of the figure.

        The legend consists of all elements after the caption. In this case, the legend consists of this paragraph.

into this HTML output:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure align-right">
        <img alt="/static/images/dummy-200x200.png" src="/static/images/dummy-200x200.png" />
        <p class="caption">This is the caption of the figure.</p>
        <div class="legend">The legend consists of all elements after the caption. In this case, the legend consists of this paragraph</div>
    </div>

Which, given this CSS:

.. code-block:: css

    /* Styles for Figures & Images */

    img {
        border: 1px solid #bbb;
        border-radius: 3px;
        padding: 4px;
        float: left;
        margin: 1em 1em 1em 0;
        box-shadow: 4px 4px 4px 0px rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.5);
    }
    img.align-right {
        float: right;
        margin: 1em 0 1em 1em;
    }

    .figure {
        border: 1px solid #bbb;
        border-radius: 3px;
        padding: 4px;
        float: left;
        margin: 0 1em 1em 0;
        box-shadow: 4px 4px 4px 0px rgba(128, 128, 128, 0.5);
    }
    .figure.align-right {
        float: right;
        margin: 0 0 1em 1em;
    }
    .figure.align-left {
        float: left;
    }
    .figure img {
        border: none;
        border-radius: 0;
        padding: 0;
        margin: 0;
        box-shadow: none;

        float: left;
    }
    .figure p.caption {
        margin: 0;
        font-size: 80%;
        padding: 4px;
        float: left;
        text-align: left;
    }
    .figure div.legend {
        padding: 4px;
        font-size: 80%;
        color: #aaa;
        font-style: italic;

        float: left;
    }

...will look something like this:

.. image:: /static/images/screenshot-13-04-29_16-42-00-pm.png
    :class: bare

This is great, but it's not *quite* what I wanted. I wanted the caption under the image and then the figure to shrink to fit the size of the image it contains. It turns out that this is impossible in HTML & CSS unless you give the browser an explicit ``width`` attribute for the ``img`` and the containing ``div``.

If you actually do that, and add a ``style="width: 200px; height: auto;"`` attribute to both the ``div`` and the ``img``, you get this - which *is* what I wanted:

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png
    :align: right

    This is the caption of the figure.

    The legend consists of all elements after the caption. In this
    case, the legend consists of this paragraph.

The problem with this, is that it means that you need to supply a width attribute containing the actual pixel width of the image, for each and every image you use. This would be *very* tedious to do by hand, so I wrote a Pelican plugin to do this, plus a couple of other related things, for me.


What the Better Figures & Images plugin does
==============================================


- Adds a ``style="width: ???px; height: auto;"`` attribute to any ``<img>`` tags in the content, by automatically checking the dimensions of the actual image file on disk and adding the appropriate attribute to the ``<img>`` tag.
- Also finds any ``<div class="figures">`` tags in the content which contain images - and adds the same style attribute to them.
- If the ``RESPONSIVE_IMAGES`` setting is true, it adds ``style="width: ???px; max-width: 100%; height: auto;"`` instead.
- Corrects Alt text: If an img alt attribute = the image filename, it sets it to ""


Assuming that the image is 250px wide, it turns output like this:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure">
        <img alt="/static/images/image.jpg" src="/static/images/image.jpg" />
        <p class="caption">
            This is the caption of the figure.
        </p>
        <div class="legend">
            Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
        </div>
    </div>

into output like this:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure" style="width: 250px; height: auto;">
        <img style="width: 250px; height: auto;" alt="" src="/static/images/image.jpg" />
        <p class="caption">
            This is the caption of the figure.
        </p>
        <div class="legend">
            Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
        </div>
    </div>

or this, if ``RESPONSIVE_IMAGES = True``:

.. code-block:: html

    <div class="figure" style="width: 250px; max-width: 100%; height: auto;">
        <img style="width: 250px; max-width: 100%; height: auto;" alt="" src="/static/images/image.jpg" />
        <p class="caption">
            This is the caption of the figure.
        </p>
        <div class="legend">
            Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
        </div>
    </div>

How to use the Plugin
========================

This plugin is now upstream in the main pelican-plugins repository, you can check that out like this:

.. code-block:: console

    $ git clone git@github.com:getpelican/pelican-plugins.git

Then add something like this to your pelican config:

.. code-block:: python

    # Where to look for plugins
    PLUGIN_PATH = '../pelican-plugins'
    # Which plugins to enable
    PLUGINS = ['better_figures_and_images']

Optionally, enable the responsive stuff via the plugin, by adding this to your config:

.. code-block:: python

    # Setting for the better_figures_and_images plugin
    RESPONSIVE_IMAGES = True

Or add something like this to your theme's CSS:

.. code-block:: css

    img, div.figure { max-width: 100%; height: auto; }

And that's it - you should now have Better Figures & Images.

(Not Very) Frequently Asked Questions
=======================================

What is the RESPONSIVE_IMAGES setting for?
---------------------------------------------

This site uses a responsive layout - it changes its layout and column widths based on the size of the screen or window you use to view it. This means, ideally, that any images contained inside those columns would also shrink or expand to fit, when the column they're in changes. If they don't, the images will break out of the columns if the column becomes too narrow.

The simplest way to do this, would be to add something like this to your CSS:

.. code-block:: css

    img, div.figure { max-width: 100%; height: auto; }

This tells the browser that images can only ever be as wide as their container - i.e. 100% of the width of their parent element. This means that when the column that the image is in shrinks - and becomes smaller than the images native width - the image will be shrunk to fit inside.

Note that this isn't the perfect solution and isn't fully responsive - because there `isn't a perfect solution at the moment <http://css-tricks.com/which-responsive-images-solution-should-you-use/>`_ - this provides a simple solution that gets me 80% of what I wanted: shrink to fit images that expand up to their full width (but no further) and stay inside their containers.

Couldn't you just...
------------------------

Yes, you could just add that to your CSS and only have the plugin add the ``width: ???px`` part - this would work fine. If you want to do that, either don't set ``RESPONSIVE_IMAGES`` in your pelican config, or set it to ``False``.

So why is there a RESPONSIVE_IMAGES setting at all?
-----------------------------------------------------

Um... It's partially just there because this is the way I wrote the plugin initially, before I thought it through properly.

The reason I *left it in*, is twofold:

#. It means that you can get responsive images and figures just by using this plugin - no need to mess with your theme's CSS if you don't want to.
#. Because there are lots of `other ways <http://css-tricks.com/which-responsive-images-solution-should-you-use/>`_ to fudge responsive images and I may decide to use one of the alternatives - and at some point, presumably an official standard way to do it will arrive. So I may want to do extra processing, add extra markup, or do other things to support future responsive image techniques here, so I left that hook in so that I could easily add it.

Why are you messing with the ALT text?
----------------------------------------

By default Pelican adds a default ``alt`` attribute to images that don't have them - and sets it to the image's filename.

This is well meaning, but wrong.

The ``alt`` attribute is meant to provide a textual alternative to the image, for people who can't see the image, for some reason - they might be blind, using a screen reader, they might be using a text-only browser, they might be a search engine, the image might not have loaded for some reason, etc...

Imagine that you are reading your page to someone over the phone. What would be the appropriate thing to do when you reach the image? [#alt_jkorplea]_ What would you say about that image if you were describing the page over the phone to someone?

If you wouldn't mention the image at all, then explicitly set the ``alt`` attribute to an empty string:

.. code-block:: html

    <img alt="" src="" ... />

Otherwise, set it to whatever you would have said over the phone.

Why not just leave it out? Because screen readers tend to read the filename for images that don't have an ``alt`` attribute. This also means that you *never* need to set the ``alt`` attribute to the image filename - that's already there in the ``src`` attribute, if needed.

Examples
====================

Here are a few working examples, showing the results of using the plugin. The original rst source for these are available in the plugins ``/test`` folder:

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-800x300.png

    This image is wider than the column it's in - try resizing the browser window.

    Because of the max-width: 100%, the image is resized to fit the column.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png
    :alt: A dummy placeholder image, 200x200 pixels square.

    This image is only 200px wide - smaller that the column it's in.

    The max-width: 100% doesn't stretch the image, because it's also got a width: 200px - making it shrink to fit.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.

.. figure:: /static/images/dummy-250x300.png
    :alt: map to buried treasure 2
    :align: right

    This is the third image caption.

    Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
    tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non
proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.

.. image:: /static/images/dummy-200x200.png

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur. Excepteur sint occaecat cupidatat non
proident, sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollit anim id est laborum.


------------

Footnotes & References:
--------------------------

.. [#rst_img] The two image directives: "image" and "figure" in reStructuredText: http://docutils.sourceforge.net/docs/ref/rst/directives.html#images
.. [#alt_jkorplea] Guidelines on ALT texts in IMG elements: http://www.cs.tut.fi/~jkorpela/html/alt.html http://www.456bereastreet.com/archive/200412/the_alt_and_title_attributes/ http://diveintoaccessibility.info/day_21_ignoring_spacer_images.html
