content/posts/tech/optimal-png-compression-for-the-web.rst, before:

:title: How I compress PNG files on this website
:slug: how-i-compress-png-files-on-this-website
:date: 2013-07-05 16:02:45
:tags: png, compression, howto, web, svg
:meta_description: Using a careful combination to compression techniques, I can get up to 3x compression over regular PNG files, for my use case.
:thumbnail: /static/images/microscope-diagram.png
:status: draft

Most of the .PNG files on this site are the 'blueprint' style diagrams, like this one:

.. figure:: /static/images/microscope-diagram.png
    :alt: Blueprint style diagram showing an optical microscope. The sample inside is magnified in a bubble to 2,500 times, showing it to be a complex, detailed paisley pattern.

    This illustration is a large 5.6MB SVG file, mostly because of the very detailed paisley pattern that I used.

    Exported to PNG - and then compressed using the process below, you can get this down to 118.5kB.

I create these in Inkscape as vector .SVG files & export them to bitmap .PNG files. I then re-compress them, to ensure that the image files that are used on the live website are as small & quick to load as possible.

As these diagrams have a fairly limited colour palette, I can get lots of extra compression by reducing the colour depth of the final .PNG files from the default 32bit (millions of colours) to 8bit (256 colours) - without any loss of visual quality.

This is a two step process, combined into a single pipeline. The first step is ``pngnq`` which quantizes the image, reducing it's colour depth. The second step uses ``advpng`` to losslessly re-compress this image data to get the smallest possible filesize.

To install these two utilities on ubuntu/debian Linux, run this in a console:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sudo apt-get install advancecomp pngnq

The basic idea is to do the following to the file, running it through both utilities, one after the other:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pngnq -s1 image.png
    $ advpng -z -4 image.png

We can do that in one go by joining the commands together, like this:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pngnq -s1 image.png && advpng -z -4 -q image-nq8.png

By default ``pngnq`` adds ``-nq8`` onto the end of the filename. You can change that with the ``-e`` parameter, but it doesn't seem to support not changing the name - i.e. overwriting to original. As an added complication ``advpng`` doesn't support processing from stdin to stdout, so we have to pass it a filename.

If we want to process a whole folder full of files, we can do this in parallel, getting all our machines cores in on the action, using ``find`` and ``xargs``. This example uses 4 processes to do 4 files at once:

.. code-block:: console

    $ find . -iname "*png" -print0 | xargs -r0 --max-procs=4 -n1 sh -c 'pngnq -s1 "$1" && advpng -z -4 -q "${1%.*}"-nq8.png' -

Results
=========

Using the microscope image at the start of this post as an example, these are the results that we get at each step:

+---------------------------+----------+
| Process Step              | Result   |
+===========================+==========+
| 1: Original SVG File      | 5.6 MB   |
+---------------------------+----------+
| 2: Initial PNG Export     | 409.3 kB |
+---------------------------+----------+
| 3: Quantized with pngnq   | 123.6 kB |
+---------------------------+----------+
| 4: Compressed with advpng | 118.5 kB |
+---------------------------+----------+

This example is a *huge* SVG file - the paisley vector clipart I used is *very* detailed and ~3MB on it's own; my normal SVG files are generally around 300 kB.

Re-compressing all the blueprint style diagrams on this site - which had a **already been re-compressed using PNGOUT** - reduced their total file size from 845.9 Kb to 385.2 Kb - a whopping *~55% reduction*. Just goes to show that you need to test and adapt techniques to your particular situation - rather than just applying them blindly.

General PNG Compression
========================

If you don't want to reduce the colour palette, then the process is only one step. You can do this, to process a folder full of PNG files, 4 at a time:

.. code-block:: console

    $ find . -iname "*png" -print0 | xargs -0 --max-procs=4 -n 1 advpng -z -4 -q

Commit message:

Finished PNG compression article; renamed reddit-bots source file to match slug

content/posts/tech/optimal-png-compression-for-the-web.rst, after:

:title: How I compress PNG files on this website
:slug: how-i-compress-png-files-on-this-website
:date: 2013-07-05 16:02:45
:tags: png, compression, howto, web, svg
:meta_description: Using a careful combination to compression techniques, I can get up to 3x compression over regular PNG files, for my use case.
:thumbnail: /static/images/microscope-diagram.png

Compressing Limited Colour PNG images
=======================================

Most of the .PNG files on this site are the 'blueprint' style diagrams, like this one:

.. figure:: /static/images/microscope-diagram.png
    :alt: Blueprint style diagram showing an optical microscope. The sample inside is magnified in a bubble to 2,500 times, showing it to be a complex, detailed paisley pattern.

    This illustration is a large 5.6MB SVG file, mostly because of the very detailed paisley pattern that I used.

    Exported to PNG - and then compressed using the process below, you can get this down to 118.5kB.

I create these in Inkscape as vector .SVG files & export them to bitmap .PNG files. I then re-compress them, to ensure that the image files that are used on the live website are as small & quick to load as possible.

As these diagrams have a fairly limited colour palette, I can get lots of extra compression by reducing the colour depth of the final .PNG files from the default 32bit (millions of colours) to 8bit (256 colours) - without any loss of visual quality.

This is a two step process - which can be combined into a single pipeline. The first step is ``pngnq`` which quantizes the image, reducing its colour depth. The second step uses ``advpng`` to losslessly re-compress this image data to get the smallest possible filesize.

To install these two utilities on ubuntu/debian Linux, run this in a console:

.. code-block:: console

    $ sudo apt-get install advancecomp pngnq

The basic idea is to do the following to the file, running it through both utilities, one after the other:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pngnq -s1 image.png
    $ advpng -z -4 image.png

We can do that in one go by joining the commands together, like this:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pngnq -s1 image.png && advpng -z -4 -q image-nq8.png

By default ``pngnq`` adds ``-nq8`` onto the end of the filename. You can change that with the ``-e`` parameter, but it doesn't seem to support not changing the name - i.e. overwriting to original. As an added complication ``advpng`` doesn't support processing from stdin to stdout, so we have to pass it a filename.

If we want to process a whole folder full of files, we can do this in parallel, getting all our machines cores in on the action, using ``find`` and ``xargs``. This example uses 4 processes to do 4 files at once:

.. code-block:: console

    $ find . -iname "*png" -print0 | xargs -r0 --max-procs=4 -n1 sh -c 'pngnq -s1 "$1" && advpng -z -4 -q "${1%.*}"-nq8.png' -

You can adjust the ``--max-procs=4`` bit to match the number of cores you have - or maybe one less, if you want to process a lot of images and do other things in the meantime.

Results
=========

Using the microscope image at the start of this post as an example, these are the results that we get at each step:

+---------------------------+----------+
| Process Step              | Result   |
+===========================+==========+
| 1: Original SVG File      | 5.6 MB   |
+---------------------------+----------+
| 2: Initial PNG Export     | 409.3 kB |
+---------------------------+----------+
| 3: Quantized with pngnq   | 123.6 kB |
+---------------------------+----------+
| 4: Compressed with advpng | 118.5 kB |
+---------------------------+----------+

This example is a *huge* SVG file by my standards - the paisley vector clipart I used is *very* detailed and ~3MB on it's own; my normal SVG files are generally under 1024 kB. If we use a more typical SVG file, like the one from my `Reddit Bots article <|filename|a-marvellous-incomplete-compendium-of-reddit-automatons-bots.rst>`_ (which is 835.2 kB), we still get excellent compression, down to 78.5 kB -- just 9% of the original size and less than ⅓ of the initial PNG export size:

.. image:: /static/images/compression-results-diagram.png
    :alt: Blueprint style diagram showing the relative sizes of each step of the compression process as circles, going from 832.2 Kb to 78.5 kB


Re-compressing all the blueprint style diagrams on this site - which I had previously **already re-compressed using PNGOUT** - reduced their total file size from 845.9 Kb to 385.2 Kb - a whopping **~55% reduction**. Just goes to show that you need to test and adapt techniques to your particular situation - rather than just applying them blindly.

General PNG Compression
========================

You don't always want to reduce the colour palette - not all images are suitable for this. In that case, you can reduce the process to only one step. You can do this, to process a folder full of PNG files, four at once:

.. code-block:: console

    $ find . -iname "*png" -print0 | xargs -0 --max-procs=4 -n 1 advpng -z -4 -q

This just runs each file through ``advpng`` to maximally compress the existing image data, losslessly, without changing the colour depth or quality at all.

To make this easier, I created some `Thunar Custom Actions <|filename|useful-thunar-custom-actions.rst>`_ that give you the option to do either of these things when you right click on a PNG file.
