content/posts/tech/post-statistics-plugin-for-pelican.rst, before:

:title: Post Statistics Plugin for Pelican
:slug: post-statistics-plugin-for-pelican
:date: 2013-06-23 21:28:11
:tags: pelican, plugin, python, stats

This is a Pelican plugin to calculate various statistics about a post and store them in an ``article.stats`` dictionary. You can see this in action in the sidebar on the left of this site.

.. figure:: /static/images/pelican-plugin-post-stats-medium-example.png
    :align: right

    Nice touch from medium.com - now available in Pelican.

I initially wanted to implement the nice little "X min read" thing from `Medium <https://medium.com/>`_ - and it turned out that it was easy to provide a few other interesting stats at the same time, for people to use in their templates.

The returned ``article.stats`` dictionary contains the following:

- ``wc``: how many words
- ``read_mins``: how many minutes would it take to read this article, `based on 250 wpm <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Words_per_minute#Reading_and_comprehension>`_
- ``word_counts``: frquency count of all the words in the article; can be used for tag/word clouds
- ``fi``: `Flesch-kincaid <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flesch%E2%80%93Kincaid_readability_tests>`_ Index/ Reading Ease
- ``fk``: Flesch-kincaid Grade Level

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    {
        'wc': 2760,
        'fi': '65.94',
        'fk': '7.65',
        'word_counts': Counter({u'to': 98, u'a': 90, ...}),
        'read_mins': 12
    }

This allows you to output these values in your templates, like this, for example:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

	<p title="~{{ article.stats['wc'] }} words">~{{ article.stats['read_mins'] }} min read</p>
	<ul>
	    <li>Flesch-kincaid Index/ Reading Ease: {{ article.stats['fi'] }}</li>
	    <li>Flesch-kincaid Grade Level: {{ article.stats['fk'] }}</li>
	</ul>

The ``word_counts`` variable is a python ``Counter`` dictionary and looks something like this, with each unique word and it's frequency:

.. code-block:: python

	Counter({u'to': 98, u'a': 90, u'the': 83, u'of': 50, u'karma': 50, .....

This can be used to create a tag/word cloud for a post.

Requirements
----------------

``post_stats`` requires `BeautifulSoup <http://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/bs4/doc/>`_:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install beautifulsoup4

Caveat Emptor
---------------

Please note that the values are a wee bit approximate - it's surprisingly difficult to compute a *perfect* word count - it depends on what you count as a 'word', how many code samples, data tables, etc... you have in your post. Calculating the `Flesch-kincaid Index/ Reading Ease/ Grade level <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flesch%E2%80%93Kincaid_readability_tests>`_ stuff involves counting sylables - again something that is very hard to do perfectly, but quite easy to get 90% right.

In addition, the Flesch-kincaid stuff currently only works on English text, but everything else should work multi-language. I haven't done much unicode testing though, so `patches welcome <https://github.com/dflock/pelican-plugins/tree/post_stats>`_!

Commit message:

Added meta-description to post_stats article; added read_mins to archive templates

content/posts/tech/post-statistics-plugin-for-pelican.rst, after:

:title: Post Statistics Plugin for Pelican
:slug: post-statistics-plugin-for-pelican
:date: 2013-06-23 21:28:11
:tags: pelican, plugin, python, stats
:meta_description: A Pelican plugin to calculate various statistics about a post and store them in an ``article.stats`` dictionary. Includes time to read, word count, word frequency and Flesch-kincaid stats.

This is a Pelican plugin to calculate various statistics about a post and store them in an ``article.stats`` dictionary. You can see this in action in the sidebar on the left of this site.

.. figure:: /static/images/pelican-plugin-post-stats-medium-example.png
    :align: right

    Nice touch from medium.com - now available in Pelican.

I initially wanted to implement the nice little "X min read" thing from `Medium <https://medium.com/>`_ - and it turned out that it was easy to provide a few other interesting stats at the same time, for people to use in their templates.

The returned ``article.stats`` dictionary contains the following:

- ``wc``: how many words
- ``read_mins``: how many minutes would it take to read this article, `based on 250 wpm <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Words_per_minute#Reading_and_comprehension>`_
- ``word_counts``: frquency count of all the words in the article; can be used for tag/word clouds
- ``fi``: `Flesch-kincaid <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flesch%E2%80%93Kincaid_readability_tests>`_ Index/ Reading Ease
- ``fk``: Flesch-kincaid Grade Level

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    {
        'wc': 2760,
        'fi': '65.94',
        'fk': '7.65',
        'word_counts': Counter({u'to': 98, u'a': 90, ...}),
        'read_mins': 12
    }

This allows you to output these values in your templates, like this, for example:

.. code-block:: html+jinja

	<p title="~{{ article.stats['wc'] }} words">~{{ article.stats['read_mins'] }} min read</p>
	<ul>
	    <li>Flesch-kincaid Index/ Reading Ease: {{ article.stats['fi'] }}</li>
	    <li>Flesch-kincaid Grade Level: {{ article.stats['fk'] }}</li>
	</ul>

The ``word_counts`` variable is a python ``Counter`` dictionary and looks something like this, with each unique word and it's frequency:

.. code-block:: python

	Counter({u'to': 98, u'a': 90, u'the': 83, u'of': 50, u'karma': 50, .....

This can be used to create a tag/word cloud for a post.

Requirements
----------------

``post_stats`` requires `BeautifulSoup <http://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/bs4/doc/>`_:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install beautifulsoup4

Caveat Emptor
---------------

Please note that the values are a wee bit approximate - it's surprisingly difficult to compute a *perfect* word count - it depends on what you count as a 'word', how many code samples, data tables, etc... you have in your post. Calculating the `Flesch-kincaid Index/ Reading Ease/ Grade level <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flesch%E2%80%93Kincaid_readability_tests>`_ stuff involves counting sylables - again something that is very hard to do perfectly, but quite easy to get 90% right.

In addition, the Flesch-kincaid stuff currently only works on English text, but everything else should work multi-language. I haven't done much unicode testing though, so `patches welcome <https://github.com/dflock/pelican-plugins/tree/post_stats>`_!
