content/posts/tech/useful-thunar-custom-actions.rst, before:

:title: Useful Thunar Custom Actions
:slug: useful-thunar-custom-actions
:date: 2013-06-28 14:11:43
:tags: linux, xfce, config, howto, xubuntu, thunar, png
:thumbnail: /images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-icon.png
:meta_description: Here's how to add useful custom actions to Thunar's right click menu - and a collection of handy actions to get you started.

.. contents:: Contents:

.. image:: {filename}/images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-icon.png
    :alt: Thunar's icon, a beautifully rendered, stylized version of Thor's hammer, Mjölnir.

Thunar - XFCE & XUbuntu's small but perfectly formed file manager - has a simple mechanism that allows you to easily add new commands to the right click menu of files and folders. These are called `Custom Actions <http://docs.xfce.org/xfce/thunar/custom-actions>`_ and are easy to create... here's how to do it.

Click the **Edit** menu, then click '**Configure custom actions...**'. This will take you to the Custom Actions Manager, where you can create, edit or delete your custom actions.

You can enter anything into the command box, including complex bash scripts, names of scripts or executables on the PATH, or the full path and filename of the command you want to run.

.. image:: {filename}/images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-custom-actions-edit-1.png

On the '**Appearance Conditions**' tab, you tell Thunar when you want your item to appear in the right click menu:

.. figure:: {filename}/images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-custom-actions-edit-3.png
    :align: right

    Now, when I right click on a text file, I have extra options in my menu.

I've included my custom actions below - and you can find `more around the web <https://www.google.ca/search?q=thunar+custom+actions>`_. I've only included ones here that aren't commonly listed elsewhere.

Working Directory
-------------------

The current working directory for the command run as part of a custom action is the folder the Thunar window that launched it is currently displaying. You can test this by creating and running the following custom action:

Test CWD
============

Description:
    Prints out the current working directory
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        pwd | zenity --text-info

File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install zenity

This means that you can use just filenames without a path in your custom actions to refer to a file in the current folder. This means that you can use the ``%N`` variable to process a list of selected files, instead if having to use the ``%F`` variable which includes the full pathname - this is handy for renaming just the files, without tampering with the pathname, for example.

My Thunar Custom Actions
---------------------------

To use these yourself, just copy and paste these names, descriptions & commands into new actions in your Custom Actions Manager:

Share Folder
============
Description:
    Shares the currently selected folder, giving everyone read access.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        net usershare add %n %f "" Everyone:R guest_ok=y
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories


Flatten Folder
==============
Description:
    Moves all files from sub-folders to parent (current) folder, then removes all empty folders inside the current folder.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        find . -mindepth 2 -type f -exec mv "{}" . \; && find . -type d -empty -delete
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories

Rename to lower-case
====================
Description:
    Rename the currently selected files, making the filenames lower-case.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %N; do mv "$file" "$(echo "$file" | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]')"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    *All*

Slugify Filename
===============================
Description:
    Rename the currently selected files, making the filenames lower-case & replacing spaces with dashes.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %N; do mv "$file" "$(echo "$file" | tr -s ' ' | tr ' A-Z' '-a-z' | tr -s '-' | tr -c '[:alnum:][:cntrl:].' '-')"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    *All*

Copy Contents to Clipboard
==========================
Description:
    Copies the contents of the selected file to the clipboard.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        cat "%F" | xclip -i -selection clipboard
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Text Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install xclip

Compare
====================
Description:
    Compares selected files or folders in `Meld <http://meldmerge.org/>`_
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        meld "%F"
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories, Text Files
Requirements:
    Either `get the latest version of meld like this <https://coderwall.com/p/isntfq>`_, or install the version in your distributions repository:

    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install meld

Compress with Advpng
====================

Description:
    Runs `Advpng <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advpng>`_ on each of the selected PNG Files.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %F; do advpng -z -4 -q "$file"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*.png``
Appears if selection contains:
    Image Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install advancecomp

Quantize with pngnq
====================

Description:
    Reduce to 8bit colour, by running `pngnq <https://github.com/stuart/pngnq>`_ on each of the selected PNG Files.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %F; do pngnq -s1 "$file"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*.png``
Appears if selection contains:
    Image Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install pngnq

Optimize with jpegoptim
========================

Description:
    Losslessly optimize JPEGs, by optimizing the Huffman tables and stripping comments and EXIF metadata from the file.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %F; do jpegoptim --strip-all -of "$file"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*.jpg;*.jpeg``
Appears if selection contains:
    Image Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install jpegoptim

Commit message:

Updated thunar custom actions post - added variables, minor fix

content/posts/tech/useful-thunar-custom-actions.rst, after:

:title: Useful Thunar Custom Actions
:slug: useful-thunar-custom-actions
:date: 2013-06-28 14:11:43
:tags: linux, xfce, config, howto, xubuntu, thunar, png
:thumbnail: /images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-icon.png
:meta_description: Here's how to add useful custom actions to Thunar's right click menu - and a collection of handy actions to get you started.

.. contents:: Contents:

.. image:: {filename}/images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-icon.png
    :alt: Thunar's icon, a beautifully rendered, stylized version of Thor's hammer, Mjölnir.

Thunar - XFCE & XUbuntu's small but perfectly formed file manager - has a simple mechanism that allows you to easily add new commands to the right click menu of files and folders. These are called `Custom Actions <http://docs.xfce.org/xfce/thunar/custom-actions>`_ and are easy to create... here's how to do it.

Click the **Edit** menu, then click '**Configure custom actions...**'. This will take you to the Custom Actions Manager, where you can create, edit or delete your custom actions.

You can enter anything into the command box, including complex bash scripts, names of scripts or executables on the PATH, or the full path and filename of the command you want to run.

.. image:: {filename}/images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-custom-actions-edit-1.png

On the '**Appearance Conditions**' tab, you tell Thunar when you want your item to appear in the right click menu:

.. figure:: {filename}/images/posts/useful-thunar-custom-actions/thunar-custom-actions-edit-3.png
    :align: right

    Now, when I right click on a text file, I have extra options in my menu.

I've included my custom actions `below <#my-thunar-custom-actions>`_ - and you can find `more around the web <https://www.google.com/search?q=thunar+custom+actions>`_. I've only included ones here that aren't commonly listed elsewhere.

But first, a word about working directories and variables.

Working Directory
-------------------

The current working directory for the command run as part of a custom action is the folder the Thunar window that launched it is currently displaying. You can test this by creating and running the following custom action:

Test CWD
============

Description:
    Prints out the current working directory
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        pwd | zenity --text-info

File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install zenity

This means that you can use just filenames without a path in your custom actions to refer to a file in the current folder. This means that you can use the ``%N`` variable to process a list of selected files, instead if having to use the ``%F`` variable which includes the full pathname - this is handy for renaming just the files, without tampering with the pathname, for example.

Variables
---------

Thunar custom actions can contain variable parameters, that get substituted with the actual value when you run the action. These allow you to refer to the files that are currently selected in Thunar when running your actions, without knowing in advance which ones. The following variables are available:

+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| This... | will be replaced at runtime with this...         |
+=========+==================================================+
| %f      | The path to the first selected file              |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| %F      | The paths to all the selected files              |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| %d      | Directory contains the file referred to by %f    |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| %D      | Directories contains the files referred to by %F |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| %n      | The first selected filename, without the path    |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| %N      | All the selected filenames, without paths        |
+---------+--------------------------------------------------+

You can see examples of these being used in various ways below.

My Thunar Custom Actions
---------------------------

To use these yourself, just copy and paste these names, descriptions & commands into new actions in your Custom Actions Manager:

Share Folder
============
Description:
    Shares the currently selected folder, giving everyone read access.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        net usershare add %n %f "" Everyone:R guest_ok=y
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories


Flatten Folder
==============
Description:
    Moves all files from sub-folders to parent (current) folder, then removes all empty folders inside the current folder.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        find . -mindepth 2 -type f -exec mv "{}" . \; && find . -type d -empty -delete
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories

Rename to lower-case
====================
Description:
    Rename the currently selected files, making the filenames lower-case.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %N; do mv "$file" "$(echo "$file" | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]')"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    *All*

Slugify Filename
===============================
Description:
    Rename the currently selected files, making the filenames lower-case & replacing spaces with dashes.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %N; do mv "$file" "$(echo "$file" | tr -s ' ' | tr ' A-Z' '-a-z' | tr -s '-' | tr -c '[:alnum:][:cntrl:].' '-')"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    *All*

Copy Contents to Clipboard
==========================
Description:
    Copies the contents of the selected file to the clipboard.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        cat "%F" | xclip -i -selection clipboard
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Text Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install xclip

Compare
====================
Description:
    Compares selected files or folders in `Meld <http://meldmerge.org/>`_
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        meld %F
File Pattern:
    ``*``
Appears if selection contains:
    Directories, Text Files
Requirements:
    Either `get the latest version of meld like this <https://coderwall.com/p/isntfq>`_, or install the version in your distributions repository:

    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install meld

Compress with Advpng
====================

Description:
    Runs `Advpng <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advpng>`_ on each of the selected PNG Files.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %F; do advpng -z -4 -q "$file"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*.png``
Appears if selection contains:
    Image Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install advancecomp

Quantize with pngnq
====================

Description:
    Reduce to 8bit colour, by running `pngnq <https://github.com/stuart/pngnq>`_ on each of the selected PNG Files.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %F; do pngnq -s1 "$file"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*.png``
Appears if selection contains:
    Image Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install pngnq

Optimize with jpegoptim
========================

Description:
    Losslessly optimize JPEGs, by optimizing the Huffman tables and stripping comments and EXIF metadata from the file.
Command:
    .. code-block:: bash

        for file in %F; do jpegoptim --strip-all -of "$file"; done
File Pattern:
    ``*.jpg;*.jpeg``
Appears if selection contains:
    Image Files
Requirements:
    .. code-block:: bash

        sudo apt-get install jpegoptim
