content/posts/personal/review-nick-cave-warren-ellis-gig.adoc, before:

:title: Review: Nick Cave & Warren Ellis Gig, Vancouver 2022
:slug: review-nick-cave-and-warren-ellis-gig-vancouver-2022
:created: 2022-08-02 22:31:59-07:00
:date: 2022-03-16 19:30:00-07:00
:tags: gig,review,music,Queen Elizabeth Theatre,Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
:category: personal
:template: review
:artist: Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
:venue: Queen Elizabeth Theatre
:rating: 5
:setlist: https://music.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLxMjPyxIGFZSJeKkzppWiDQKzl2dLYuYn
:meta_description: A spellbinding & breathtaking evening, with a couple of surprising jewels, in a night full of riches.

[.lead]
A spellbinding & breathtaking evening, with a couple of surprising jewels, in a night full of riches.

This is a video from that night in Vancouver, of their cover of Cosmic Dancer, which was a fantastic surprise for me. That video was taken by someone standing just in front of me!

video::d0cf1DRmhcY[youtube]

// ## Set List

// 1.  Spinning Song - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 2.  Bright Horses - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 3.  Night Raid - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 4.  Carnage - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 5.  White Elephant - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 6.  Ghosteen - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 7.  Lavender Fields - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 8.  Waiting for You - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 9.  I Need You - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 10. Cosmic Dancer - T. Rex, performed by Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 11. God Is in the House - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 12. Hand of God - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 13. Shattered Ground - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 14. Galleon Ship - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 15. Leviathan - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 16. Balcony Man - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis

// ## Encore:
// 17. Hollywood - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 20. Henry Lee - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 21. Girl in Amber - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds

// ## Encore 2:
// 22. Into My Arms - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 24. Ghosteen Speaks - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds


We got _two_ encores. The first one was Hollywood, Henry Lee & Girl in Amber - all great. Then they cleared the stage and lots of people left. Then we got a second encore!

This is Into My Arms, which he did with just the amazing backing singers, as a second encore, after half the audience had left thinking it was done - one of several completely spellbinding moments:

video::16Dy3T1h8AI[youtube]

== Learnings

Things I learned from this gig:

- This _really_ re-enforced my earlier lessons from the Sigur Ros gig - be at the front & only go see people you would happily site down and listen to for an hour at home.
- If you're enjoying it, stay until the lights come up; if you can, make sure you don't have a deadline to be somewhere afterwards.

include::../../includes/posts/{slug}/{slug}-playlist.adoc[]

---

.The view from my seat - what a privilege to be there, what an amazing evening.
image::{static}/images/posts/{slug}/PXL_20220317_040117318.MP.avif[Photo from my seat, showing a few rows of seating, then the stage. On stage is Nick Cave at a piano, with blue backlighting, spotlit with eight tight spotlights, alternating yellow & purple. Behind him you can just see the gospel-style backing singers.]

Commit message:

Update to Nick Cave gig review

content/posts/personal/review-nick-cave-warren-ellis-gig.adoc, after:

:title: Review: Nick Cave & Warren Ellis Gig, Vancouver 2022
:slug: review-nick-cave-and-warren-ellis-gig-vancouver-2022
:created: 2022-08-02 22:31:59-07:00
:date: 2022-03-16 19:30:00-07:00
:modified: 2023-05-24 09:48:21-07:00
:tags: gig,review,music,Queen Elizabeth Theatre,Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
:category: personal
:template: review
:artist: Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
:venue: Queen Elizabeth Theatre
:rating: 5
:setlist: https://music.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLxMjPyxIGFZSJeKkzppWiDQKzl2dLYuYn
:meta_description: A spellbinding & breathtaking evening, with a couple of surprising jewels, in a night full of riches.

[.lead]
A spellbinding & breathtaking evening, with a couple of surprising jewels, in a night full of riches.

Just got back from seeing Nick Cave and Warren Ellis in Vancouver. What a joy and a privilege! I've missed live music so much - what an incredible night!

This is a video from that night in Vancouver, of their cover of Cosmic Dancer, which was a fantastic surprise for me. That video was taken by someone standing just in front of me!

video::d0cf1DRmhcY[youtube]

// ## Set List

// 1.  Spinning Song - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 2.  Bright Horses - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 3.  Night Raid - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 4.  Carnage - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 5.  White Elephant - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 6.  Ghosteen - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 7.  Lavender Fields - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 8.  Waiting for You - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 9.  I Need You - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 10. Cosmic Dancer - T. Rex, performed by Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 11. God Is in the House - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 12. Hand of God - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 13. Shattered Ground - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis
// 14. Galleon Ship - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 15. Leviathan - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 16. Balcony Man - Nick Cave & Warren Ellis

// ## Encore:
// 17. Hollywood - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 20. Henry Lee - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 21. Girl in Amber - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds

// ## Encore 2:
// 22. Into My Arms - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds
// 24. Ghosteen Speaks - Nick Cave & the Bad Seeds


We got _two_ encores. The first one was Hollywood, Henry Lee & Girl in Amber - all great. Then they cleared the stage and lots of people left. Then we got a second encore!

This is Into My Arms, which he did with just the amazing backing singers, as a second encore, after half the audience had left thinking it was done - one of several completely spellbinding moments:

video::16Dy3T1h8AI[youtube]

== Learnings

Things I learned from this gig:

- This _really_ re-enforced my earlier lessons from the link:++{filename}/posts/personal/review-sigur-ros-world-tour-vancouver-2022.adoc++[Sigur Rós gig] - be at the front & only go see people you would happily sit down and listen to for a solid hour at home.
- If you're enjoying it, stay until the very end; if you can, make sure you don't have to be somewhere afterwards.

include::../../includes/posts/{slug}/{slug}-playlist.adoc[]

---

.The view from my seat - what a privilege to be there, what an amazing evening.
image::{static}/images/posts/{slug}/PXL_20220317_040117318.MP.avif[Photo from my seat, showing a few rows of seating, then the stage. On stage is Nick Cave at a piano, with blue backlighting, spotlit with eight tight spotlights, alternating yellow & purple. Behind him, you can just see the gospel-style backing singers.]
